Chapter 1
Introduction
There is a clear consensus both in the academic literature and in the policy
debate that sound management of fiscal risks is essential for both fiscal sus-
tainability and macroeconomic stability of sovereign countries (Brixi & Schick
2002, George Kopits 2014, IMF 2016). One of the classes of fiscal risks that
were particularly neglected in the usual fiscal sustainability analysis is that
related to contingent liabilities, that is, liabilities whose occurrences depends
on the outcome of an uncertain event (Brixi & Schick 2002). A second impor-
tant development in recent years is that with the increased decentralization
in the provision of public services, the contingent liabilities, both explicit
and implicit, arising from subnational governments (SNGs) are increasingly
relevant for fiscal sustainability analysis. This relevance is higher the more
spending and taxation powers are given to the subnational entities in the
fiscal framework currently in place in a given country.
    Although the above characterization could be employed to describe the
recent economic history of several countries, Brazil might as well be the
                                         2
canonical example. A federation with one Federal District, 26 states, and
5,570 municipalities, Brazil experienced in the 80s and 90s repeated fiscal
crisis of subnational entities with three rounds of debt restructurings. These
episodes severely threatened the success of several macroeconomic stabiliza-
tion programs that hoped to control the three-to-four-digit annual inflation
rates that wreak havoc the Brazilian economy from 1980 through 1994. It
was only with the success of the Real Plan in fighting the hyperinflation,
and with a more comprehensive debt restructuring that aimed to correct the
underlying SNG fiscal problems, that the political and economic conditions
enabled for a complete reformulation of the fiscal institutions in place, cul-
minating with the publication of a Fiscal Responsibility Law (FRL) in 2000
(Manoel et al. 2013, p. 34-35).
    The FRL was a comprehensive law that promoted several changes in the
institutions related to the Brazilian budgetary process. However, for the
purposes of this study, the focus will be on the controls that were put forth
for SGNs borrowings. Following the typology of borrowing controls used by
Ahmad et al. (2005) and first proposed by Ter-Minassian & Craig (1997),
Brazil has adopted both a rules-based control and an administrative control
for SNG borrowing. In a rules-based control, a fiscal rule is imposed that
directly constrains the SNG ability to borrow. In Brazil, the FRL adopted
both a golden rule and a debt ceiling rule. In an administrative control, the
central government has some form of direct control over the SGN borrowing.
In Brazil, if the central government must offer a guarantee for an individual
borrowing operation, then the Finance Ministry, through the National Trea-
sury Secretariat (NTS), must assess that entity “payment capacity” before
                                        3
the operation is authorized. The current methodology employed by NTS
was enacted in 2012 and makes use of several fiscal indicators to classify the
SGNs entities in different credit classifications, similar in spirit to the process
adopted by rating agencies in giving credit ratings. However, this method-
ology is currently being revised 1 , as the NTS is looking for an alternative
suite of fiscal indicators that are more transparent and more easily calculated.
In this context, the assessement of the statistical and practical significance
of both the current and the newly set of fiscal indicators used by the Na-
tional Treasury Secretariat to assess the fiscal sustainability of subnational
governments in Brazil is both necessary and timely.
     The strand of literature on Early Warning Systems (EWS) for economic
crisis are particularly relevant for this endeavour. Following the seminal work
by Kaminsky et al. (1998) and Berg & Pattillo (1999) on currency crisis, it
was not long until fiscal crisis were also tackled (Manasse et al. 2003, Fuertes
& Kalotychou 2007, Baldacci et al. 2011, Berti et al. 2012, Dawood et al.
2017). In this study, the focus will be on what is usually called the paramet-
ric approach, that makes use of limited dependent variables models, such as
probit and logit. There are three main contributions. First, as usually true
in most countries, disaggregate fiscal data on regional governments tends to
have a much lower quality and standardization then those available for central
governments2 . This study aims to compile, consolidate and make available
   1
     The NTS published the new set fiscal indicators and opened the methodology
for a public revision process in the period of 10/05/2017 to 30/06/2017. The ma-
terial related to this revision is available at http://www.tesouro.fazenda.gov.br/
sistemagarantiauniao
   2
     Although there are several initiatives in place in Brazil to modernize the information
available for SNGs, in the fiscal transparency evaluation conducted by the IMF in Brazil
completed in June 2016 and published in May 2017 it is noted that “Weaknesses in fiscal
                                              4
on machine readable format regional discriminated data on the fiscal vari-
ables that are needed to compute the fiscal indicators used by the NTS for
payment capacity evaluation. To the best of the author’s knowledge, this
database is inexistent today. The second contribution is the expansion of
the Early Warning System literature for dealing with subnational govern-
ments. Most of the studies focus on sovereign governments, but, as noted
by Ianchovichina et al. (2007), SGNs are sufficiently different from sovereign
governments and demand separate analysis. The third and final contribution
is that by recognizing a fiscal crisis as a rare event as suggested by King &
Zeng (2001), that is, a binary dependent variable with dozens to thousands
of times fewer ones than zeros, we make use of the bias-reduction method
first proposed by Firth (1993) and implemented by Kosmidis (2017) in the
R-package brglm.
    The remainder of this study is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a
brief literature review on the main characteristics of early warning systems for
economic crisis and also give a general overview of the institutional context
under which the National Treasury Secretariat conducts its payment capacity
evaluations. Section 3 presents a descriptive analysis of the data and also
outline the econometric model used. Section 4 presents the empirical results
and section 5 summarizes our conclusions.
reporting also undermine the ability to assess the fiscal position and risks. Not all states
and municipalities comply with their reporting obligations, and information on subna-
tional finances is generally less timely and comprehensive than information on the central
governments. (IMF 2017, p. 62)”
                                              5
Chapter 2
Literature Review
As noted by Baldacci et al. (2011), the literature that aims to build mod-
els that can provide early warning signals of fiscal sustainability problems
tend to differ with respect to three major characteristics: the definition of
the crisis event; the statistical methodology employed; and the set of ex-
planatory variables used. Broadly following this differences, in section 2.1
we review theoretical definitions of fiscal sustainability in order to propose a
definition of fiscal distress1 event that will be used in this study. In section
2.2 we present a general formulation of the early warning system problem
and the methodological approach pursued in this study. Regarding the set
of explanatory variables, since the main objective of this study is to assess
the significance of the fiscal indicators used by the National Treasury Sec-
retariat in their mandate to evaluate the payment capacity of subnational
governments, the explanatory variables are already defined. Therefore we
let the presentation of the fiscal indicators for section 3.1 coupled with the
   1
     For the purposes of this study, fiscal distress, fiscal stress, fiscal crisis, and debt crisis
will be used as synonymous
                                               6
exploratory analysis of the data.
2.1       Fiscal Distress
The focus of this study will be on the empirical analysis of the main determi-
nants of fiscal distress episodes in subnational governments in Brazil in the
2008-2016 period. Nevertheless, it is important a brief theoretical review of
the most used concepts of fiscal sustainability so that an appropriate char-
acterization of what fiscal distress event entails, or, and perhaps even more
importantly, what it do not entail.
   There are a few distinct ways in which fiscal sustainability is defined in
the economic literature. Although they all in some way or another alludes to
the more general concept of sustainability, understood here as a process that
“meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs” (Brundtland 1987), the differences
are important for the interpretation of the empirical results and should be
emphasized at the outset.
   A more narrow definition of fiscal sustainability equates it to solvency,
that is, the ability of an entity, in the case of this study a subnational gov-
ernment, to make payments in order to service its debt obligations on the
due date. Although certainly useful for corporations, this definition is far
too stringent when applied to governments. The reasoning is not as much
because governments do not actually default on its debt, but, as pointed out
by Burnside (2005), when it is clear that a policy mix is unsustainable, gov-
ernments tend to take remedial actions in order to avoid an outright default.
                                        7
A more useful definition of fiscal sustainability takes this into account and
can be equated “to a governments ability to indefinitely maintain the same
set of policies while remaining solvent” (Burnside 2005, pg.11). Therefore it
makes sense to speak of an unsustainable policy mix even though a default
on the debt never actually took place. For the purposes of this study, both
an explicit default on the debt and an unsustainable policy mix should be
considered an indicator of a fiscal distress event.
    It is worth pointing out that in the definitions given so far, no distinction
was made between solvency and liquidity problems. A country may believe
itself to be solvent, but it still faces problems in meeting its obligations
because of cash flows problems. The reason we don’t pursue this distinction is
less based on the fact that there are no theoretical differences between the two
concepts, but because the empirical consequences of both difficulties are likely
to be observationally equivalent (Chuhan 2005, pg.89). Both solvency and
liquidity are related to an entity ability to pay. However, especially because
of the absence of clearly defined rules for bankruptcy in the public sector,
the government willingness to pay also becomes important, in a tradition
that goes back at least to Eaton & Gersovitz (1981). Again, however, for the
purposes of this study, both are fiscal crisis episodes stemming from ability
or willingness to pay are likely to be observationally equivalent.
    One of the uses of fiscal sustainability that will not be used in this study
is related to the costs, in terms of economic efficiency or growth, related
to a given combination of fiscal and monetary policy. Although this use is
suggested by Burnside (2005), we shall make no claim in this study related
to it.
                                        8
    After looking at the theoretical definitions of fiscal sustainability, its worth
to take a closer look into how previous literature on EWS defined the debt
crisis episodes for sovereign governments. Manasse et al. (2003) defines a
country to be in a debt crisis if either the government fails to meet principal
or interest payment on external obligation on the due date as classified by
Standard & Poor’s or if it receives a nonconcessional IMF loan in excess of
100 percent of its quota. Fuertes & Kalotychou (2007) considers a country to
be in default in a given year if the arrears increase over a threshold percentage
of external debt and a rescheduling agreement is reached in which the amount
of debt rescheduled exceeds the decrease in the arrears stock. Baldacci et al.
(2011) uses a more general definition and considers a fiscal crisis not only
the episodes of debt default or restructuring and recourse to exceptional
financing, but also an implicit default crystallized in high inflation rates and
a deterioration in market access measured by high bond yields pressures
(where high is those that yield spreads that are more than two standard
deviations away from the mean).
    Although the empirical literature is of limited applicability in giving op-
erational guidance in defining fiscal crisis episodes for this study because of
differences in sovereign and subnational governments, it is possible to see
that the theoretical elements discussed of solvency and liquidity are present.
2.2       Early Warning Systems
Before we delve into the different methodological approaches used in the
literature in early warning systems, we need a general framework to capture
                                         9
the purpose of an EWS model. Following Fuertes & Kalotychou (2007), we
denote by dit the dummy variable that equals 1 if the state i had a crisis
event in period t and 0 otherwise. Since the objective is to signal crisis in
advance, the dependent variable yit of interest is forward-looking in nature,
and it takes the value of one if a crisis happens during an h time horizon,
that is                     

      However, it is important to remark that the information set2 for predicting
yit is that available at time t − 1. To fix ideas, let the explanatory variable
be the primary balance as a ratio of GDP and let t = 2016. A prediction
ŷit = 1 from an EWS with horizon h = 1 implies that using the primary
balance as a ratio to GDP from 2015 backwards, the model is signalling a
potential crisis in 2016 for state i. Similarly, if h = 2, the model is signalling
a potential crisis in 2016 or 2017. Note that again only the primary balance
as a ratio to GDP from 2015 backward is used to make this prediction.
      In a more general notation, if we let x denote the explanatory vari-
ables included in the model, and the past of x for state i as Xi,t−1 =
{xi,t−1 , xi,t−2 , . . . }, the prediction problem of an EWS with a given horizon
h is given by

      In practice using the whole past Xi,t−1 of the explanatory variables is not
possible, and we will follow other studies using only the last period variables,
    2
      The information set, usually denoted by Ωt consists of the set of all potential explana-
tory variables that could be included in a regression model.
                                              10
that is, xi,t−1 . This is not problematic as long as there are stock variables
that can capture the effects of flows from previous periods.
      For estimating the function f in (2.2), there are two major approaches
in the literature on early warning systems. The “indicators” or “signaling”
approach and the multivariate regression analysis approach (Baldacci et al.
2011, pg. 5). The first approach belongs to the class of non-parametric
methods. Their essential characteristic is that they do not assume a spe-
cific functional form for f , and simply try to estimate a smooth relationship
between the explanatory and dependent variables. The second approach be-
longs to the class of parametric methods. In this case, a specific functional
form for f is assumed, and, with this knowledge at hand, the relevant param-
eters are estimated3 . In this study, we will take the latter approach. More
specifically, we will make use of a limited dependent variable model know as
logit regression4 .
      As noted by Baldacci et al. (2011), the main reason for using the multivari-
ate approach in this study is the easily available null hypothesis significance
tests that can be conducted to assess the statistical significance of both in-
dividual variables and collection of variables. This allows for a clean way to
attain one of the objectives of this study, that is, to compare and contrast the
current and the newly set of fiscal indicators used by the National Treasury
Secretariat to assess the payment capacity of SGNs in Brazil.
    3
      James et al. (2013) is a nice introduction and overview of statistical learning tech-
niques, both parametric and non-parametric. Hastie et al. (2009) is a more advanced and
complete treatment.
    4
      The specific characteristics of the model employed are discussed in section 3.2
                                              11
Chapter 3
Methods
3.1      Data
The majority of the explanatory variables used in this study are derived
from the fiscal reports made available by the National Treasury Secretariat
(NTS), who is responsible for collecting primary fiscal data from subnational
governments in Brazil. The consolidated dataset is available at https://
github.com/fjuniorr/junior2017. The focus of this section is to present
an exploratory and descriptive analysis of the fiscal indicators that are used
(or whose use is proposed in the new methodology) by the NTS in its payment
capacity evaluation.
    The final dataset used in this study consists of fiscal indicators compiled
for the 26 states and the federal district from 2008 through 2016, totaling
n = 243 observations. Since the explanatory variables will be lagged 1 year,
the sample size is reduced from 2009-2016, totaling n = 216 for estimation
purposes.
                                      12
     For the purposes of this study, the publication of a decree of financial
calamity1 will be the event that characterizes a fiscal crisis in a given state-
year. The reasoning is that, consistent with the discussion made in section
2.1, the decree of public calamity, although legally questionable2 , clearly
signals that the policy mix has become unsustainable, and, even if there are
still doubts about the states ability to pay in terms of solvency and liquidity,
definitely they don’t have the willingness to pay. Therefore the dummy
default dit will take the value of one in 2016 for the states of Rio de Janeiro
(RJ), Rio Grande do Sul (RS), and Minas Gerais (MG). Following previous
studies, we will use the time-horizon of one year h = 1, meaning that the
forward-looking independent variable yit will be equal to dit .
     Table 3.1 presents descriptive statistics for the explanatory variables that
will be used in this study. With respect to the fiscal indicators of the current
methodology, four variables are especially different in the non-calamity/calamity
dichotomy. These variables show that the states that did not declared finan-
cial calamity have lower debt (Gross debt / Net current revenue - 0.86 ± 0.56
vs 2.19 ± 0.13), a less expensive payroll cost (Compensation of employees /
Net current revenue - 0.54 ± 0.09 vs 0.74 ± 0.04), more savings (Current fiscal
balance / Current revenue - 0.23 ± 0.17 vs 0.00 ± 0.12) and more investments
(Gross investment in nonfinancial assets / Total expenditure - 0.09 ± 0.04 vs
0.03 ± 0.01) than those states that did declare financial calamity. The ratio
Primary balance / Debt Service also shows that the calamity states were
   1
     http://economia.estadao.com.br/noticias/geral,
veja-por-que-os-estados-decretam-calamidade-financeira,10000096967
   2
     http://g1.globo.com/bom-dia-brasil/noticia/2016/12/
calamidade-financeira-de-estados-nao-e-reconhecida-pelo-governo.html
                                        13
running on average a primary deficit (−0.66 ± 1.00), although with too much
variability overall to characterize the differences between the two groups.
The same holds true for the ratio Social contributions / Social benefits that
shows that the states that declared calamity on average have a larger social
security deficit, although with large variability overall.
    In regard to the fiscal indicators proposed by the new methodology, the
non-calamity/calamity difference is startling. Besides the already identified
higher debt and lower savings of calamity states, they have very large liquidity
problems compared to the non-calamity states (Current liabilities / Cash
and cash equivalents - 0.47 ± 0.36 vs 2.57 ± 0.70). Although with the data
available it is not possible to distinguish how big is the arrears stock, this
proxy indicates that the number is likely to be very large for calamity states.
    One particular feature of the data that is not possible to gauge from table
3.1 is for how long the states that declared financial calamity in 2016 had
worse fiscal indicators than the other states. Figure 3.1 shows this evolution
for the fiscal indicators of the new methodology. The major trend is that
in the whole 2008-2016 the two groups of states were different, but, the
states that declared financial calamity in 2016 had a major fiscal deterioration
in 2015 and 2016. The evolution of Current liabilities / Cash and cash
equivalents is particularly marked, going from an average of 0.98 in 2014, to
1.88 in 2015 and ballooning to 2.57 in 2016.
                                       14
3.2       Econometric Model
In this section we mostly follow the expositions and results from Greene
(2011), Heij et al. (2004) and Davidson & MacKinnon (2004) adapted to the
notation used in this study.
    To assess the relative importance of these several potential explanatory
variables, we need to use multiple regression analysis. The main model in
this study will be a logit model, which is a special case of a binary response
model. The binary response model can be derived from an underlying latent
variable model. The latent variable model is

    This is the so-called index function, x0i,t−1 β is the systematic term and it
is an idiosyncratic error term. In our case, the latent variable yit∗ can be inter-
preted as either a propensity to default or as a measure of creditworthiness.
We don’t observe yit∗ , only yit according to

                                          17
Assuming that it has a standard logistic distribution we have that

    The density (pmf) for each observation is given by

    Therefore the log-likelihood `(β) for a random sample of size n = N · T
is given by

    Maximization of 3.4 with respect to β gives the maximum likelihood
estimates.
Perfect Classifier
A common problem in applied work with binary dependent variables occurs
whenever there is a linear combination of the explanatory variables that can
                                               18
perfect classify every observation. That is

    This phenomenon is called complete separation, and it produces infinite
parameter estimates in the usual numerical optimization algorithms that at-
tempt to make the value of 3.4 as close to zero as possible. Davidson &
MacKinnon (2004) gives three main reasons for the occurrence of this phe-
nomenon in practice. The sample size is very small, the model fits extremely
well, or the dataset is characterized by a much larger proportion of 1s or 0s.
It is likely the case that this study fulfills all three criteria, and therefore
a different estimation procedure is warranted. We make use of a maximum
penalized likelihood estimation first suggested by Firth (1993) and imple-
mented by Kosmidis (2017) in the R-package brglm. The advantage of this
procedure is that the even in cases of complete or quasi-complete separation
the estimates and their standard errors are always finite (Kosmidis 2017).
Inference and Goodness of fit
Inference on the logit model can be conducted in the usual fashion. The
significance of individual explanatory variables can be tested by the usual
t-test and the significance of joint variables can be tested by the likelihood
ratio test (Heij et al. 2004, p. 453). The former is based on the loss of log-
likelihood that results from the imposition of g independent restrictions on
                                       19
the parameters of a given model. The test statistic can be computed as

    where l(θ̂u ) is the log-likelihood of the unrestricted model and l(θ̂r ) the
log-likelihood of the restricted model (the one with the restrictions applied).
The null hypothesis H0 : θ̂r is rejected in favor of the alternative H1 : θ̂u if
the test statistic is sufficiently large.
                                          20
Chapter 4
Results
Before presenting the econometric results, a word of caution is in order. It is
important to keep in mind that all the results rest on the definition of fiscal
distress event, which, in this study, produced only 3 crisis episodes across the
sample of 243 observations. As discussed in section 3.2, this raises issues of
bias in the estimates and problems related to complete and quasi-complete
separation. Although we are making use of a bias reduction method proposed
by Firth (1993) and implemented by Kosmidis (2017), by no means this puts
a definitive end to concerns related to the robustness of the results.
    The general objective of this study is to test the statistical significance
of the fiscal indicators used the by the National Treasury Secretariat (NTS)
in payment capacity evaluations. However, because the NTS is currently
revising the methodology employed in those evaluations, two similar but still
different strategies could profitably be pursued in order to assess this set of
fiscal indicators. The first would began by considering all fiscal ratios ever
                                       21
defined by the NTS1 and from that set try to exclude variables that are
not significant. Following Kennedy (2008), this would be a “testing down”
specification approach. The second strategy would begun by taking into
consideration only the fiscal indicators that the NTS is proposing to become
the new standard, and from this set test if they could frutifully be augmented
by other fiscal ratios. Again, in the sense suggested by Kennedy (2008), this
would be a “testing up” specification strategy.
     In this study, we followed both approaches. More specifically, in the “test-
ing down” approach, we began with a model that includes all explanatory
variables. From this full model, we considered two reduced nested mod-
els that were formed based on the fiscal indicators present in each payment
capacity methodology. This allows us to test for the joint significance of
several explanatory variables and directly compare the significance of each
methodology. In the “testing up” approach, the base model uses as explana-
tory variables only the 3 fiscal ratios proposed in the new payment capacity
evaluation. We then run individual regressions against each of the fiscal vari-
ables set forth in the Finance Minister Decree n 306, 10/09/2012. Finally,
all significant variables of the second stage are then added one by one to the
base model, and we conduct tests for the significance and look for changes
in sign and/or significance of the base variables. This strategy allows us to
better grasp if the proposed set of fiscal indicators of the new methodology
could usefully be expanded with previously used ratios while minimizing the
number of tests conducted. We don’t “test down” the full model because it
   1
     That is to say the fiscal indicators defined in the Finance Minister Decree n 306,
10/09/2012 and those in the newly proposed methodology available at http://www.
tesouro.fazenda.gov.br/sistemagarantiauniao
                                            22
is not clear what criteria should be used to exclude a given variable at each
stage without either going through all combinations or making more or less
arbitrary choices.
    Two last remarks are in order before we delve into the results. First, the
ratio Gross Debt / Net current revenue is included in both methodologies but
obviously will be included only once in the full model. Similarly, the calcula-
tion rule of the ratio Current fiscal balance / Current revenue was changed in
the new methodology to Current expenses / Current revenue. However, since
they convey the same information, in order to avoid multicollinearity issues,
only the ratio Current expenses / Current revenue from the newly proposed
methodology will be used for estimation purposes. Second, we follow the sug-
gestion given in Gelman (2008) and scale all fiscal indicators with a division
by two standard deviations, that is, zi,t−1 = xi,t−1 − mean(x)/2 · sd(x). The
interpretation of the regression coefficients is equal to the mean ±1 standard
deviation, the same comparison of possible untransformed binary predictors.
To say it differently, the coefficients can now be interpretable as changes from
low to high values of the explanatory variable of interest.
Testing down
Table 4.1 presents the regression estimates for the three first models of in-
terest. Model 1 is the full model and includes all fiscal indicators used by
the NTS, be in the current or the new methodology. We also estimate two
nested models that correspond to particular restrictions applied to the full
model. Model 2 corresponds to a restricted model in which all variables of
                                         23
the current methodology are set to zero. Model 3 on the other hand, corre-
sponds to the restricted model in which all variables of the new methodology
are set to zero. Although, in this case, only the ratio Current liabilities /
Cash and cash equivalents is set to zero.
    It is worth reminding the reader that, contrary to linear models, the
coefficients in non-linear models can’t be interpreted as marginal effects,
although we can interpret both the sign and the relative magnitude of the
relative magnitude of the coefficients.
    In model 1, both Current liabilities / Cash and cash equivalents and
Gross investment in nonfinancial assets / Total expenditure were significant
at a 5% level. However, the sign in the latter was somewhat surprising. We
would expect that states that were on the verge of a crisis would reduce
their investment rate because of the discretionary nature of this type of
expenditure. Therefore, in a predictive sense, a higher investment rate would
translate into a smaller probability of a fiscal crisis, the opposite of what was
found in model 1. In model 3 the sign is negative as expected, but the
variable was no longer significant. One possible explanation is related to a
large amount of investment spending undertaken by Rio de Janeiro for the
2016 Summer Olympics, even when they were already financially constrained.
In model 2 only Current liabilities / Cash and cash equivalents was significant
at a 5% level. In model 3, that excludes only Current liabilities / Cash and
cash equivalents with respect to model 1, several variables were significant.
Gross debt / Net current revenue and Primary balance / Debt service were
significant at the 5% level while Current expenses / Current revenue and
Compensation of employees / Net current revenue at the 10% level. Because
                                       24
of this drastic change of the significant explanatory variables in going from
model 1 to model 3, it does raises concerns about an omitted variable bias
in model 3.
    In order to better grasp which model is in some sense better, we can con-
duct a likelihood-ratio test described in section 3.2. First, likely due to the
bias-reduction method employed, the log-likelihood for model 2 is, in fact,
greather than the log-likelihood for the unrestricted model 1, meaning that
there was a likelihood gain moving from imposing the parameter restric-
tion. For model 3, the test statistic is LR = 2 · (−5.964 + 8.246) = 4.56.
Compared with a χ2 with one degree of freedom, the p-value is equal to 0.033.
We, therefore, reject the null hypothesis at a 5% significance level, meaning
that the loss of likelihood in imposing the restriction is likely different from
zero and the unrestricted model (model 1) should be considered the best one.
Together, these results indicate that in choosing between the information set
of the current versus the newly proposed methodology, the newly proposed
methodology appears to be the better choice.
                                      
                                                      26
Testing up
Table 4.2 presents the regression estimates for the “testing up” approach.
Model 1 (Model 2 in table 4.1) is the base model that uses the fiscal ratios
proposed in the new payment capacity evaluation as explanatory variables.
We first ran individual simple regressions against each of the fiscal variables
set forth in the Finance Minister Decree n 306, 10/09/2012. The ratios Debt
service / Net current revenue, Compensation of employees / Net current
revenue and Gross investment in nonfinancial assets / Total expenditure
were significant in the individual regression. We then added the ratios to
the base model. This is reported in models 2 through 4 in table 4.2. Debt
service / Net current revenue (Model 2) was not significant and didn’t change
the sign of the other explanatory variables. Compensation of employees /
Net current revenue (Model 3) was also not significant, but with its inclusion
in the model Current expenses / Current revenue was significant at a 5%
level. The sign, however, was somewhat puzzling. It indicates that holding
compensation of employees fixed, lower savings reduces the probability of
a crisis. There are no readily available explanations for this result except
for the observation that Compensation of employees is the most significant
component of current expenses in all states. Gross investment in nonfinancial
assets / Total expenditure was (Model 4) was not only significant at the 10%
level, but made Gross debt / Net current revenue significant as well at the
same level. The sign was again positive, implying that higher investment is
correlated with higher probability of a fiscal crisis.
    We finally add Compensation of employees / Net current revenue and
                                      27
Gross investment in nonfinancial assets / Total expenditure to the base model
(Model 5) giving what can be considered the final specification of the “testing
up” strategy. In this model Current liabilities / Cash and cash equivalents
and Gross investment in nonfinancial assets / Total expenditure were signif-
icant at the 5% level. We again conduct a likelihood ratio test to compare
the unrestricted model (model 5) with the restricted one (model 1). The test
statistic is LR = 2 · (−4.063 + 5.804) = 3.48. Compared with a χ2 with two
degrees of freedom, the p-value is equal to 0.175. We, therefore, fail to reject
the null hypothesis. The interpretation is that it might be the case that the
loss of likelihood by excluding the two variables from the unrestricted model
is not different from zero. Again this indicates that restricting the informa-
tion set to the fiscal indicators of the newly proposed methodology appears
to be a reasonable choice.
                                       
                                                               29
Chapter 5
Conclusion
The purpose of the current study was to evaluate the statistical and practical
significance of both the current and the newly proposed fiscal indicators used
by the National Treasury Secretariat (NTS) to assess the payment capacity
of subnational governments in Brazil. The current methodology enacted in
2012 by the NTS was deemed to be overly complicated in general and also
based on a set of fiscal indicators that could potentially be simpler in terms of
dimensionality without harm in terms of predictive performance. This view
was justified on the basis of the correlation between the fiscal indicators.
    This study has identified that the new methodology that uses only 3 ratios
instead of the 8 of the current methodology is in fact statistically superior
in terms of the likelihood of the given data. This superior performance is
mostly attributed to the ratio Current liabilities / Cash and cash equivalents
who proved itself to be significant in all specifications employed in this study.
    Expressing these results in the language of the concepts related to fiscal
sustainability discussed in section 2.1, we can say that empirically, the will-
                                        30
ingness and ability to pay of an SGN in Brazil appear to be mostly explained
by its liquidity position. Solvency ratios appear to be only instrumental for
this explanation, in the sense that they matter only to the extent that in-
directly they influence the trajectory of liquidity ratios. To exemplify, high
debt ratios to net current revenue can only explain fiscal crisis episodes in
Brazil to the extent that debt service obligations generate higher current
liabilities.
    The research has also shown that for the sample at hand, the fiscal indi-
cators proposed in the new methodology proposed by the NTS could maybe
fruitfully include Gross investment in nonfinancial assets / Total expenditure.
However, this result appears to be more related to the observed behavior of
Rio de Janeiro, who, even in financial difficulties, kept investment rates high
because of the commitments made with the 2016 Summer Olympics.
    There are four major sources of weakness in this study, all in some way or
another related to data constraints. First, we did not allow for the presence
of unobservable heterogeneity between states, by using, for example, a fixed
effects logit model. The reason for this is simply that in fixed effect estimation
all the observations corresponding to states that did not face a crisis episode
in the sample horizon would be dropped out of the likelihood function, leaving
only the observations of Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Sul and Minas Gerais.
    The second source of weakness is related to the definition of fiscal crisis
episode adopted. The enactment of a decree of financial calamity is a politi-
cal process that a given state might not participate because it does not align
with the political calculus of the politicians involved in this decision. Al-
though this sounds like a tautology, it is especially important in the current
                                       31
case. The reason is that the most common interpretation of the Brazilian
legal system, shared by the Ministry of Finance1 , says that the decree of
calamity should be restricted to natural disasters, and therefore the benefits,
such as the possibility to delay payments to creditors and to bypass some
legal requirements for procurement and budgeting process, is not valid under
“financial calamity”. A more reliable definition of fiscal crisis episode would
need to make use of arrears data that still do not exist for SGN’s in Brazil.
     A third source of weakness comes from the 2008-2016 horizon employed.
Brazil experienced in the 80s and 90s repeated fiscal crisis of subnational
entities with three rounds of debt restructurings. These should clearly be
considered a fiscal crisis episode. However, the majority of the explanatory
variables used in this study were fiscal variables and indicators derived from
the datasets provided by the National Treasury Secretariat. Although, the
original period covered by the data published by NTS extends from 1986
through 2016, totalling 31 years of data, events like hyperinflation, change
of currencies, change in fiscal reporting and budget classifications and no
tracking of stock variables makes the process of compiling a cleaned and
consistent dataset a research enterprise of its own.
     Finally, because there were only three fiscal crisis episodes in the sample
that happened in the same year, it was not possible to look into out of sample
forecast accuracy measures, which are ultimately the final yardstick by which
EWS models should be judged. (Berg et al. 2005).
     Putting the need for the collection of a more comprehensive dataset of
   1
     http://g1.globo.com/bom-dia-brasil/noticia/2016/12/
calamidade-financeira-de-estados-nao-e-reconhecida-pelo-governo.html
                                       32
fiscal variables on SGN aside, the cited weakness of this study are useful
alternatives for future work. Additionally, because most of the EWS liter-
ature is currently focused on sovereign countries, studies that use different
strategies in the three areas that tend to differentiate early warning systems
models, namely, the definition of the crisis event, the statistical methodology
employed, and the set of explanatory variables, but applied to SGNs, would
be a welcome addition to the literature.
                                      33